
# 04
### Writeup by arcayn, 400 points
`
IOINR EANED GTTEA INEHM ETEIS
PMAON RGNHB BTTWE EEYSC YMOET
PTOAL STEII DAHDE LTNUT MYSOR
OTIEH WEGTN TMHAO YSYWW DNOAA
EDHNG LNNHI OHDGE SSEOT YAEAD
TENRY TITBO TRDHI OMALN DBTOO
DEAUH EFTOR LREVO EHSMS CWEST
AAADY EAIZN RRULT JNTWY SLAOO
ATTHK UTYED GOOMY FOSEF SASDO
NSNAH OSSIO EIBPS ALCCR NDTNO
EMEHA STNEL TIHIE AABED PYTMP
SOOED IUWHS LACEE TSORS NUICY
RASMU TEEMR NSTME EYUXG STAOU
OSEEY BIELR YNLEW CUTID THNES
PGMKE YOYNE YEVYE UTSTY NOSEY
RIAER NDSEC OLCRX XOYCE X
`

First step, as always, is to check the cipher statistics. I'm using my script based on the ACA reference statistics, found in `cipher_stats.py`, which will compare the statistics of a given ciphertext to the ACA references and give a likelihood rank to each possible cipher type. Here are the top few options (smaller number is better):
```
Myszkowski 3.02
Cadenus 3.06
Nihilist Transp 3.1
Swagman 3.13
Redefence 3.32
Railfence 3.32
Columnar 3.55
Route Transp 4.45
```
Almost exactly the same as last time, so let's apply the same logic. We can rule out Railfence, but not redefence just yet, as it would be a natural progression. Both of these are easily solvable automatically, but let's be more interesting than that. Looking at the ciphertext, we see `OLCRX XOYCE X` on the last line. This many `X` characters close together seems unlikely in english plaintext, but this indicates to me some form of padding, to increase the ciphertext length up to something which is a multiple of the cipher period, or number of columns. For factors of `396`, the ciphertext length, our feasible key lengths are probably 4, 6 ,9, 11, and 12. We're going to want to get all the `X`s on the last line though, as the padding will have to be moved to the end, so lets start with a key length of 9. The tool we'll be using is [here](http://tholman.com/other/transposition/).
```
0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8

I	O	I	N	R	E	A	N	E
D	G	T	T	E	A	I	N	E
H	M	E	T	E	I	S	P	M
A	O	N	R	G	N	H	B	B
```
Here's what the first few rows look like after loading in. Let's move those X paddings to the end and we can figure out what to do with them later.

```
0	1	4	5	6	7	| 3	2	8

I	O	R	E	A	N	| N	I	E
D	G	E	A	I	N	| T	T	E
H	M	E	I	S	P	| T	E	M
```

Our general strategy now is to look for recognisable words in the first row. The last plaintext had `AGENT` near the beginning, but that's not possible here. After looking at this for a while, I got a little bit lucky because I had dragged the columns at the end into `NNIE`. On the line below we can see `D` and we also have an `O` in the top line. Recalling challenge 02, that message was signed off by `DONNIE`, so I'm happy to bet that that's what our message should start with, or it should at least be close to the start. Let's up the period size to 11 so we can fit the `D` on the top line, and arrange the columns so we have `DONNIE` at the start, and also the padding at the end. Turning our attention now to the final row, we see

`E	L	R	Y	O	C	O	C	X	X	X`

Remembering that `ROCCO` was the addressee of challenge 02, let's arrange it to read `ROCCOXXX`. Now looking at the deciphered plaintext, we have `DONNIEIAGREETHATMEETING...`, which looks good to me - note your mileage may vary depending on your use of double letters etc.
We need to do a bit more work to count letters in the plaintext to find the flag but a bit of reading gets us `ractf{concernedencrypted}` and we're done.
